Added ecosystem section missing content (#77)
sora-xor/sora-docs: src/xst.md

> # XST

Reviewer: Is it advisable to add the following changes in a separate pull request https://github.com/sora-xor/sora-docs/pull/42?

Author: I think it's (it is) ok to keep the changes separate, since this is more of a theoretical overview, whereas the other version is more technical

- SORA Synthetics are tokens pegged to value indices, backed by XOR
- The first SORA Synthetic Asset is the DAI-pegged XSTUSD
- SORA Synthetic XST assets for other major stores of value will be available in the future, once oracles are integrated into the SORA network
- XST was [proposed as an
  RFP](https://github.com/sora-xor/rfps/pull/8/files) and is currently
  on the SORA testnet

> 

Reviewer 2: not sure the list is a good choice here
I think a short paragraph summarizing the contents below would be a better tldr

Author: Updated!

Long before cryptocurrencies (or even digital computers) existed, [back in 1912](https://dspace.gipe.ac.in/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10973/26798/GIPE-093010.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y), the American economist [Irving Fisher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irving_Fisher) questioned the instability in the purchasing power of the gold-backed US dollar, explaining:

> “_We now have a dollar of fixed weight (25.8 grains), but varying purchasing power. Under the plan proposed, we should have a dollar of fixed purchasing power, but varying weight_.” This would come to be the groundwork for the "compensated" dollar.

In other words, because gold was highly volatile in purchasing power, instead of keeping the dollar fixed to a certain amount of gold, [Fisher proposed](https://www.richmondfed.org/~/media/richmondfedorg/publications/research/economic_quarterly/1993/summer/pdf/patinkin.pdf) that the dollar be backed by varying amounts of gold, but pegged to a basket of goods (an index). However, at the time, Fisher's ideas were not adopted due to operational and harmonization issues of the economy of that period.

> With the advent of cryptoeconomic systems on blockchains, the "compensated" dollar principles, Fisher's groundwork, could finally be translated into the realm of cryptoeconomics and given new life as part of a cryptoeconomic system: "a blockchain-based token can be created as a derivative of another one, targeted at holding a stable unit of value". SORA synthetics implements this concept and _in a way, you could say that Irving Fisher is the father of SORA Synthetics_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the advent of cryptoeconomic systems on blockchains, the "compensated" dollar principles, Fisher's groundwork, could finally be translated into the realm of cryptoeconomics and given new life as part of a cryptoeconomic system: "a blockchain-based token can be created as a derivative of another one, targeted at holding a stable unit of value". SORA synthetics implement this concept and _in a way, you could say that Irving Fisher is the father of SORA Synthetics_.
```

### Stablecoins and Synthetic Assets Today

> Currently, there are 5 different types of stablecoins/pegged assets:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, there are five different types of stablecoins, or pegged assets:
```

- **Fiat-Backed Stablecoins (or Tokenized Fiat):** These stablecoins are backed by and pegged to dollars (or other fiat currency), their value remains tied to the price of the pegged currency. For example, [USDC](https://www.circle.com/en/usdc).

> - **Crypto-Backed Stablecoins (or On-Chain Collateralized Stablecoins):** These are backed by other crypto assets. For example [DAI](https://makerdao.com/en/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Crypto-Backed Stablecoins (or On-Chain Collateralized Stablecoins):** These are backed by other crypto assets. For example, [DAI](https://makerdao.com/en/).
```

- **Precious Metal-Backed Stablecoins (or Off-Chain Collateralized

>   Stablecoins):** Like gold-standard fiat, these stablecoins use gold and other metals to back their value. For example [Tether Gold](https://gold.tether.to/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Stablecoins):** Like gold-standard fiat, these stablecoins use gold and other metals to back their value. For example, [Tether Gold](https://gold.tether.to/).
```

> - **Algorithmic Stablecoins:** These stablecoins use algorithms to back their value, there are some variants that can be pegged to fiat values, depending on the algorithm used. For example [AMPL](https://www.ampleforth.org/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Algorithmic Stablecoins:** These stablecoins use algorithms to back their value. There are some variants that can be pegged to fiat values, depending on the algorithm used. For example, [AMPL](https://www.ampleforth.org/).
```

> - **Synthetic assets** are tokens with value pegged to an oraclized asset. Purely synthetic assets can be used to represent many types of value, such as, to track the shares of financial instruments and securities. For example, [SYNTHETIX](https://synthetix.io/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Synthetic assets:** These are tokens with value pegged to an oraclized asset. Purely synthetic assets can be used to track the shares of financial instruments and securities, and can represent many types of value. For example, [SYNTHETIX](https://synthetix.io/).
```

XST is an algorithmic stablecoin for the SORA ecosystem, initially proposed in 2018, based on the ideas of Irving Fisher's compensated dollar. However, instead of being backed by gold, XST assets are backed by XOR.

> # What Makes SORA XST Different?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What Makes SORA XST Different?
```

Now that stablecoins and synthetic assets have been defined and classified, you might be wondering what makes XST stand out from the rest?

XST helps to solve the problem of XOR liquidity by creating synthetic assets backed by a variable amount of XOR and pegged to a target index (e.g., a currency). XOR is minted/deminted to always guarantee the value of the pegged index. The first index implemented is linked to the value of DAI and will be called XSTUSD.

### Non-Collateralized Stability

> In the case of XST assets, as they are backed by XOR, XOR can be algorithmically minted or deminted (burned) to provide the full value for the XST assets upon demand. The XST Primary Market Maker that mints/demints XST assets and XOR is built in as a liquidity source into Polkaswap's liquidity aggregator, so buyers/sellers will always get the full value in XOR for their XST assets, and the price will never deviate (lower or higher) from the asset price. Therefore, XST is not subject to price slippage or a lack of liquidity. This works, for example, in the case of XSTUSD, because a single XSTUSD is a claim for $1 USD _worth of XOR_, and **not a claim for actual $USD itself**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of XST assets, as they are backed by XOR, XOR can be algorithmically minted or deminted (burned) to provide the full value for the XST assets upon demand. The XST Primary Market Maker that mints/demints XST assets and XOR is built as a liquidity source into Polkaswap's liquidity aggregator. This means that buyers and sellers will always get the full value in XOR for their XST assets, and the price will never deviate (lower or higher) from the asset price. Therefore, XST is not subject to price slippage or a lack of liquidity. This works, for example, in the case of XSTUSD, because a single XSTUSD is a claim for $1 USD _worth of XOR_, and **not a claim for actual $USD itself**.
```

With normal stablecoins (_specifically fiat-backed_), the adjustment of collateral value and the value of the issued stablecoins is not automatic. This is due to price changes in the collaterals, and it is therefore necessary to overcollateralize. With stable tokens like DAI, for example, you have to lock up 130% of the value in ETH to mint new DAI, and your vault gets liquidated if you go under the required collateral level.

XST does not require overcollateralization and users of XST assets do not risk liquidation. This is because new XOR can always be minted to provide the full value of an XST asset upon exchange back into XOR.

> Normally, algorithmic stablecoins derive their value from smart contracts linked to oracles that determine current prices, however, XSTUSD's value is currently derived from the price of XOR-DAI, although (_Spoiler alert_) SORAcles are currently under development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Normally, algorithmic stablecoins derive their value from smart contracts linked to oracles that determine current prices. However, XSTUSD's value is currently derived from the price of XOR-DAI, although (_Spoiler alert_) SORAcles are currently under development.
```

## How Will This Be Implemented?

XST implementation is quite an exciting topic, however, it isn't
complete yet. The RFP proposing the implementation of XSTUSD has been
published and now the calvary of development and testing is
ongoing. The implementation scenario includes whitelisting XSTUSD on
Polkaswap and subsequently setting up a liquidity source, as mentioned
before, where the price users pay would never deviate from the price
of XOR-DAI.
![](/.gitbook/assets/xst-buy-sell.png)

> Some more interesting details available from the [XSTUSD RFP](https://github.com/sora-xor/rfps/pull/8/files) mention: "If the XSTUSD-XOR price goes lower than DAI-XOR, then when the user is buying, new XOR will be minted and used to fill the order (similar to the token bonding curve). When buying XSTUSD with XOR, then new XSTUSD can be minted/deminted when filling the orders, in order to maintain the peg." Before you ask wen, there is no concrete answer _...for now._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some more interesting details available from the [XSTUSD RFP](https://github.com/sora-xor/rfps/pull/8/files) mention: "If the XSTUSD-XOR price goes lower than DAI-XOR, then when the user is buying, new XOR will be minted and used to fill the order (similar to the token bonding curve). When buying XSTUSD with XOR, then new XSTUSD can be minted/deminted when filling the orders, in order to maintain the peg." Before you ask when, there is no concrete answer _...for now._
```

> XST implementation is just the beginning and, as was hinted earlier, _SORAcles_ are also in the development pipeline which will ensure that a variety of XST assets can be implemented for many different indices of value. Another interesting implementation tied to this is the [SORA Social Insurance](social-insurance.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
XST implementation is just the beginning and, as was hinted earlier, _SORAcles_ are also in the development pipeline. The introduction of SORAcles will ensure that a variety of XST assets can be implemented for many different indices of value. Another interesting implementation tied to this is the [SORA Social Insurance](social-insurance.md).
```

Author: Removed this paragraph altogether.

In the meantime, you can find XSTUSD on [Polkaswap](https://polkaswap.io/). The XST asset id is `0x0200080000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000`

You can swap XOR to XSTUSD and vice-versa.

![](/.gitbook/assets/xstusd-demo1.png)

After you click on SWAP, you will receive a confirmation message with
the transaction details. Click CONFIRM and sign the transaction with

> the Polkadot.js browser extension in the popup window.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the Polkadot.js browser extension in the pop-up window.
```

![](/.gitbook/assets/xstusd-demo2.png)

> Finally, if you're interested in how the SORA RFP system works, take a look at this complete guide on [Proposing New Functionalities to Polkaswap and the SORA Network](rfp.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, if you're interested in how the SORA RFP system works, take a look at this complete guide on [Proposing New Functionalities to Polkaswap and the SORA Network](rfp.md).
```
